






      
        Affiliate Marketing with Springer Nature - Choose your Program today |
      
      Springer — International Publisher
    









skip to context











						SpringerLink shop
						
						










Subjects


Services


About Us










        
            Affiliate Marketing with Springer Nature
        
    
Springer Nature is one of the world's leading publishers of research, educational and technical literature. It comprises a number of respected and trusted imprints that offer a wide range of high-quality products and services. As the largest publisher of scientific literature, Springer Nature publishes journals with the highest impact in the scientific community and is regarded as a pioneer in the field of Open Access publications.​
As an international scientific publisher, we offer you five different affiliate programs that differ in their target groups.
For customers of Springer, researchers, academics, professors and teachers, but also at students, specialists, executives, Science interested commercial provider we recommend the SpringerLink Shop INT Affiliate Program. Provide your audience with the content   they really want and earn an attractive commission. The Springer Nature Author Affiliate Program is aimed exclusively at our authors.
Become a partner in our affiliate programs today—promote Springer Nature products and earn money with every order!




Participating is easy:



Activate your account




Integrate our ads




Get your commission





Activate your account
We will review your application within 3 working days and accept you into our program. Please make sure to read our terms and conditions carefully in order to avoid any misunderstandings.


          Read more
          about Activate your account




Integrate our ads
Choose your favorite format from the provided advertising media. Promote individual products with our product data feed, for instance, or use our appealing brand banners.


          Read more
          about Integrate our ads




Get your commission
For each order placed by clicking on one of our links on your website, you will receive a commission.


          Read more
          about Get your commission









        
            The SpringerLink Shop INT Affiliate Program
        
    
link.springer.com provides fast and access to the full range of our online collection in the fields of science, technology, medicine, and business, humanities, and social sciences. This partner program is aimed primarily at researchers, academics, professors and teachers, but also at students, specialists (e.g. IT experts), executives, universities, institutions and commercial providers (such as content providers, bloggers, price comparison sites, voucher sites, display networks, etc.). Here you can find out everything about the SpringerLink Shop Affiliate Program.





        
            The Nature Affiliate Program
        
    
The program is aimed at researchers, scientists, students, universities, nature authors, bloggers and commercial providers (such as voucher sites, content providers, display networks and many more). Register here for the Nature Affiliate Program.





        
            The Springer Nature Author Affiliate Program
        
    
This partner program is exclusively aimed at the authors of the Springer Nature publishing group, whose publications can be ordered online at link.springer.com. Information on our Springer Nature Author Affiliate Program can be found here.









Services


Advertisers


Authors & Editors


Booksellers (SpringerNature)


Book Reviewers


Instructors & lecturers (SpringerNature)


Journalists


Librarians (SpringerNature)


Open Access & Springer


Editorial Policies


Rights & Permissions


Societies & Publishing Partners


Subscription Agencies (SpringerNature)


Help & Contact











Publish with us

Authors


Journal authors


Editorial Policies


Open access & Springer





Discover content

SpringerLink


Books A - Z


Journals A - Z


Video





Other services

Instructors & lecturers (SpringerNature)


Librarians (SpringerNature)


Societies & Publishing Partners


Advertisers


SpringerLink shop





About Springer

About us


Help & Support


Contact us


Press releases


Impressum












Manage cookies / Do not sell my data


Accessibility statement


Privacy policy


California privacy statement (Optional)


Terms and conditions


Help and support






© 2023 Springer Nature









